docs: adds ADR 12. Clickhouse vs dbt (#112)
openedx/openedx-aspects: docs/decisions/0012_clickhouse_dbt.rst

Status
******

Accepted

Context
*******

Most of the use cases for Aspects require complex transformations to be performed on the data stored in
:ref:`clickhouse` before it can be displayed in :ref:`superset`. :ref:`xapi-concepts` is a good format for communicating
learning-related events as they happen, but in order to analyse them and draw conclusions for what these events signify
over time, Aspects needs views of the data that are designed specifically for the queries performed.

:ref:`clickhouse` provides some features for transforming complex data, but creating efficient views and managing schema
changes over time can be difficult. Plus, some of these features (like named collections) are not available on all
hosted :ref:`clickhouse` services.

This ADR describes the division of responsibilities in Aspects between the :ref:`clickhouse` database and :ref:`dbt`, a
data transformation tool.

Decision
********

**Store in Clickhouse, transform with dbt**

Raw event and event sink data tables should continue to be created using :ref:`clickhouse-migrations`.

Data transformations on this raw data should be made with :ref:`dbt`, including:

* materialized views
* partitions

> * dictionaries

Reviewer: Dictionaries aren't available in dbt yet, but we're hoping to contract with Rory to get them added in the next FC. Currently they're still in Alembic. I don't know if it matters for this doc, maybe a `(pending)` and link to the task?

Author: Done: https://docsopenedxorg--112.org.readthedocs.build/projects/openedx-aspects/en/112/decisions/0012_clickhouse_dbt.html#decision

* fields extracted from event JSON

> Note that while we use dbt to manage these data transformations, the transformations themselves 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while we use dbt to manage the database schema that performs the transformations, the transformations themselves happen in the ClickHouse process. As data is inserted it is immediately transformed and stored in various query-efficient tables.
```

Author: Oops! I forgot to finish that thought :)

Have added your content as a "note", see: https://docsopenedxorg--112.org.readthedocs.build/projects/openedx-aspects/en/112/decisions/0012_clickhouse_dbt.html#decision

Consequences
************

#. Contribute upstream to `dbt-clickhouse`_ where support for required features is missing.

> #. Move transformations made by the "query" and "dataset" Aspects Superset assets to `aspects-dbt`_.

Reviewer: This probably deserves a "where possible", there are several things we still have to do in Superset virtual datasets because we have to use filters in specific ways for performance reasons, but I think this is still the long term goal as ClickHouse's predicate pushdown capabilities get overhauled.
